Notes

I really need to start to log my thoughts during coding somewhere. Not for bookkeeping or any other useful means, just to record how many thinks I have came up during working on this, so I will know whether it is much or not based on something other than my impression.

I won't do retrospection, for all previous thoughts, just log them when (if) they are back. The current thing is about open loop clients.

See the atomic broadcast part of BigBFT is borrowed from Narwhal/Bullshark, which deploys open loop clients, so that even if some proposed blocks are not committed eventually. If BigBFT follows the same practice, the latency may constantly increase as the system runs, because more and more transactions are queued between consensus and execution.

Bullshark is pure atomic broadcast work. The protocol ends at the point the block is committed, which is inside the scope of the consensus protocol itself. So, if the consensus cannot catch up to the request rate, the block interval will build up, and nodes can easily decrease (or sustain a stable) workload by discarding transactions before proposing new blocks.

BigBFT is a replication work, the ordered transactions need to be executed, and by all signs the execution will probably not keep up with the ordering. If there is no proper back pressure from execution to consensus, consensus will not slow down according to execution throughput, the latency will keep increase and not stabilize.

There are two approaches. One is to add the back pressure, the other is to switch to close loop clients, which naturally comes with back pressure.

For the first approach, I need the consensus to be aware of the progress of execution. I need to set up signals that "permit to execute more", and consensus decides the timing to propose blocks according to not only how itself is going but also how execution is going. Alternative to signal I can also just implement consensus and execution as one big state machine, so consensus can directly query execution's progress from the shared state, but that is a bad idea obviously.

For the second approach, I need to implement "lossless" replication i.e. all transactions are executed without the need of retrying, so the latency will not be affected by the choice of retry timeout. This means the Bullshark implementation must commit every proposed blocks, without either giving up certify them or garbage collect the pending-delivery blocks (either certified or not). I have currently done this, but the first approach seems to make more sense after I came up with it. So I will need to try it instead.

---

To be verified, but one thing full-fledge replication different from atomic broadcast is f+1 replies collection. The client side is not just blind sender. The latency is not measured just until blocks are outputted. It is crucial to design correct clients as well as replicas so the latency of open loop system is not built up on client side either.

Currently, the clients can generate 50k to even 100k of requests/second when working with 4 replicas, but can only safely generate 5k when working with 70 of them. The latency will constantly goes up if target rate is higher. Keep a 5k per client rate while increase the number of client does not increase latency, so it's client implementation problem.

---

The prefill of 100G state has been stuck for several times, while 1G demo state works well. The problem is that 2 replica instances out of 70 did not properly mount their 300G SSD to /tmp (because some mysterious device busy reason), so the /tmp folder remains mounted under system disk. The remaining space of the 8G system disk is sufficient for 1G state but exhausted and the prefilling silently stuck with 100G prefilling.

---

The problem when combining Narwhal, RocksDB and large number of nodes. RocksDB demands larger blocks, because that produces largely batched multi_get, results in higher (SSD read) concurrency and higher throughput. However, in Narwhal, the blocks come from every node. With more nodes, there must be more blocks. If you force same number of blocks, you must increase block time, results in unaffordable latency. As the throughput bottleneck-ed by the execution (i.e. RocksDB), it must substantially apply back pressure to Narwhal so that the ordering throughput (in the term of transactions/second) is capped at RocksDB's capacity as the number of nodes grows, or the latency will not converge. Bounded transactions/second + increasing blocks/second = smaller block => poorer RocksDB performance. Thus, performance is not scalable.

---

Now I start to consider sharded blockchain and cross shard transactions, which may inevitably force the whole system to go (back to) close loop. The root problem is that for any participant in a distributed transaction, it cannot locally figure out whether the participated transactions will be even finished (either committed or aborted) or not if the (client) coordinator may abandon the transaction orchestration at any point and the other participants may (or may not) discard the same transaction sent to them.

I don't find a good way to deal with distributed transactions with current style of one-shot, never retry clients. Any potential solution involves some form of "lossless" where either clients or replicas (or both) would "insist" on the initiated transactions. If so, fixed sending rate will probably unfit, and we basically have to go close loop.

On the other hand, going close loop, which requires replicas to commit every proposed blocks, could be easier than what I previously thought. The key is to shutdown f (faulty) nodes, so only minimum number of the blocks required to progress is proposed. I also need to adjust Bullshark's leader blocks to avoid long period without leader blocks. Other than that, we can only see what's going wrong.

---

Now we go back to the client scalability. Every message received by the same client lines up, even if they are replies for concurrent requests that are independent to each other. The client-side queuing increases latency, and that increasement becomes significant when client needs to process massive number of replies per request (e.g. 67, notice that it is 2f+1 instead of f+1. For the late messages client still needs to recognize them to be late and discard explicitly). For open loop settings this is less a trouble. The new requests depart at fixed rate unconditionally. If client is receiving the amount of replies it is not capable to process, those replies are just queued up (actually on replica side, the back pressure eventually ends in the replica's unbounded sending queues), resulting in constant throughput with even-increasing latency.

However, now we are close loop. The delay of processing replies causes the delay of departing new requests, and finally capped the throughput (while lucky or not the latency will be stable for sure). I even see the throughput changes in second-scale period, whose explanation could be that after commmitting a batch of requests, the lately-arriving f replies of those requests block clients from committing any later-issued requests. I probably should orchestrate only f+1 replies for each request anyway.

I will need to increase the number of clients per instance. One client worker that controls all of them should be fine and preferred for centralized state management. The replies of different requests will land in different connection stream queues and different client receiving queues and will not impede each other (except for processor time).

----

Client worker needs to manage state. Currently it is just latency recording, but soon I should impelement multi-stage transactions and client worker will need to keep track on their progress as well. By the way, I borrow the name "client worker" from DSLabs where each client worker operates one client. Now the thing is different as discussed, I think I should switch the name to e.g. "workload".

Essentially, there are three components. There are (dumb) clients who work with opaque requests and replies and never interprete them (except check whether the replies match). They perform the "send one receive N" loops and deal with the network. There are workloads who drive the transactions by invoking the clients. They are specific to the transactions, so I will need to implement several workloads for all combinations of YCSB-T/UTXO and sharded/unsharded. Finally, there is a controller that issue transactions to and collect latencies from the workloads. Under the close loop setting, I can simplify by letting the workloads to self-issue, virtually collect latencies with a shared mutable state, and the controller only needs to schedule concurrent workload tasks at the task layer.

----

Connect 10k clients from one instance is fine, but connect 2k clients from each of the 5 instances will time out. I don't even know where the timeout is reported, I have added keep alive to the connections.